hi my name is dr. Tibor Lazar I'm the
owner and surgeon for Lazar veterinary
surgery I'm going to talk about cranial
cruciate ligament tears in dogs and cats
and then after which I'll talk about
surgical repair I want to start out by
thanking Webster veterinary supply for
allowing me to use their illustrations
this is a wonderful app on the ipad
called
dia what we're looking at here is a tear
of what we call the cranial cruciate
ligament in dogs and cats and people
it's the ACL it's the same structure in
dogs and cats with a slightly different
name the structure on the right is
normal and on the left it's torn the way
we make the diagnosis of a cruciate
ligament tear is with a particular
manipulation called cranial drawer and
I'm going to show that here the two
bones above and below the knee joint the
femur in the tibia and if I put my hands
above and below and I can elicit this
type of manipulation called the drawer
sign it is really conclusive for
cruciate ligament tear and so it's in a
complete tear can be a very easy
diagnosis to make in a partial tear it
can be a little bit more challenging in
some situations now as far as the big
question is why did this happen usually
there's some event running in the yard
playing with another dog however in dogs
it's typically a slow degenerative
condition it's falling apart for right
now unknown reasons there may have been
some event but it tends to be fairly
minor in nature and if it wasn't that
event it could have been something the
next day or the next week this is
different than it is in people in people
it's a normal ligament that's torn with
a skiing accident car accident some
sudden trauma in cats we also tend to
see this sudden traumatic form rather
than the slow degenerative cause of dogs
it doesn't really matter why it tears
the repairs still the same but it's
important to realize this condition and
dogs because many of these dogs will end
up tearing
the other knee statistically there's
about a 40% chance that the other knee
will have the same problem and very
commonly it occurs within a year
sometimes they're torn at about the same
time and sometimes we will repair both
at the same time the typical signalmen
tour presentation on a dog is a small
medium or large breed basically a dog
the ages that we see are typically three
to eight years of age although we
certainly see dogs is young as a year of
age or even a little bit younger and we
see some older dogs ten twelve even
fourteen years of age there's another
structure in the knee called medial
meniscus there are actually several
structures but that's the most
noteworthy because we very commonly will
see that tear as the drawer manipulation
occurs it will commonly cause a tear in
the back part of the meniscus it's
really impossible to identify in most
situations on physical exam although
sometimes we will appreciate a popping
sensation which could be characteristic
with that it's something though that we
do need to identify at the time of
surgery because if it's torn we need to
remove the torn portion okay now I'm
going to talk about surgical repair
technique that has several names we call
the extra capsular repair it's also
known as the modified flow technique
old-fashioned technique it's been around
for about 40 years and it's still used
quite a bit these days it's a technique
that we use primarily in the smaller
breed dogs and cats but we will use it
occasionally in the larger breeds
especially for financial concerns it is
a bit less expensive than some of the
other techniques so let me go through
the procedure and talk a bit more about
the aftercare and complications
so this is looking at the joint from the
front over here we see a tear of the
cruciate ligament and over here this is
the medial meniscus so any torn parts we
take out we have the view of the entire
joint during this surgical procedure now
the next step is to put in essentially
an artificial ligament there's various
structures most people including myself
use synthetic nylon to act as the new
ligament it is looped behind a little
bone they're called favela crosses
diagonally through a hole that we drill
in the tibia and then we pull the suture
back and secure it using a metallic
crimp in most cases
so immediately after surgery that drawer
sign that I demonstrated is gone the the
knee feels like a normal knee again that
is actually not even meant to be the
nylon is not meant to be the final
holding strength though rather this
surgery puts the two pieces of bone
together holds in that position long
enough so that the body's scar tissue
reaction will do the the rest of the
work it will provide the ultimate
holding strength in theory two months
out from surgery we could take out that
nylon if it was causing a problem that's
pretty rare but if we did take it out we
would most likely not have to replace
anything as far as potential
complications fairly low minor
complications that we can see are things
like bruising swelling redness those
typically go away within a few days
as far as more dramatic complications we
can see a break of a part of the implant
I'd say that to less than a 1% chance of
that and usually there's some trauma
involved the dog falling down the stairs
getting out chasing a squirrel something
that is more than should be allowed
during the the recovery period infection
is the potential concern and long-term
of potential concern would be a tear of
that meniscus the structure that I
showed you is very commonly torn at the
time of injury but if it's not then it
can be torn at some point in the future
now as far as aftercare we're looking at
a two-month period of restricted
activity no running jumping playing no
doing stairs no jumping on furniture the
concern is more critical early on first
two weeks it's outside really just for
bathroom breaks with no real walks for
exercise at the time of suture removal
in two weeks if all looks good we'll
start doing some slow leash walks about
five minutes at
time and a month out we can increase it
by a few minutes
six weeks out we increase it a little
bit more that gets us to about eight
weeks out by that point most dogs are
using the leg reasonably well a smaller
breed is more likely to be pretty close
to normal while the larger dogs are
probably still limping a fair bit but
even so at that point we will start
rapidly adding more activity and so that
the goal is by three months out we're
back to completely normal activity so it
is a very good technique as I say
especially for the smaller dogs but for
the larger dogs typically we consider it
a second choice